# partograph-in-Arden-syntax
Arden Syntax for partograph
This was a Masters in Helath informatics assignement on modelling Active period of child birth.
It must therefore be treated with an academic critique provided the time it was undertaken.
Background
The Partograph is a printed graphical record used to monitor and report the progress of labour during childbirth (Lavender & Bernitz, 2020). When applied correctly, the Partograph is a key tool in the intervention to identify and make decisions about complications that arise during child labour (Bernitz et al.). According to the WHO, the objective of the partograph was to guide midwives and physicians – attending to mothers giving birth – in making the decisions such as the need for augmented labour, artificial rupturing of membranes, and a caesarean section. Furthermore, the WHO, in their 2016 publication on guidelines for a positive pregnancy experience (WHO, 2016) recommended that foetal assessments guided with the use of ultrasound equipment and documented onto this partograph in a bid to reduce neonatal mortality by identifying complications such as distress.

Maternal mortality – as per publications cited by Ozimek (Ozimek & Kilpatrick, 2018) –varied between 12 deaths per 100,000 live births in industrialized nations, compared to 546 in sub-Saharan Africa and as many as 1100 in Sierra Leone alone in a 25-year range. In addition, neonatal mortality varied between 42.3 - 27.5 per 1000 live births. In sub-Saharan Africa alone and this within a 19-year range (Parmigiani & Bevilacqua).

According to a study by Negash and Alelgn et al published in 2021, proper partograph utilization was just over 50% in Ethiopia (Negash & Alelgn, 2022). Before that study, Tilahun et al, had found it to be below 50% (43%) with associated factors such as knowledge, education level, and a conducive obstetric facility in the same country. In Uganda, a study conducted to determine the level of Partograph completion and use by Mukisa, J et al published in 2019, found that documentation of age, gravidity, and parity had incompletion rates of 79.1, 52.7, and 3.2 percent respectively. Another study found that completion rates as per WHO standards were only at 4.2% in Uganda (Lugobe et al., 2019). This could indicate to the quality of care received by mothers giving birth is below the recommendations (WHO, 2016). The WHO has since revised the recommendations from the earlier partograph to the Labour Care guide that would improve the experience for women and their babies during childbirth. Consolidated from evidence-based clinical care, the new tool recommends practices that promote a positive childbirth experience (WHO, 2021).

The adoption and application of Clinical decision support systems amplify the quality of care by creating accountability systems with alerts and actions in managing complications during childbirth. Through constructing procedural and knowledge-based rules from the new WHO Labour care guide, and translating them into logical statements that generate alerts and post actions for obstetric caregivers during labour, a clinical decision support system influences the desired outcomes. This submission, therefore, illustrates the possibility of conversion of clinical guidelines into decision rules to support the progress of labour with the development of MLMs.

Key decisions made by a physician/Nurse during labour 1. When to artificially rupture membranes and aid normal delivery. 2. When to assist the mother turn left. 3. When and why to carry out caesarian birth. 4. When to argument labour and relieve pain. 5. When to refer the woman from one facility to another. By embedding the key decisions in several Medical logic modules, we illustrate that alerts and recommended actions invoked by the provided the arguments from variables about the woman in active labour have been captured by an EMR or directly entered into a communication portal (EMR interface) by the caregivers. We further demonstrate each with the decision tables that identify when to alert and recommended action to the caregivers during active labour. Point to note that under certain circumstances, several other decisions have to be made and recommended by the CDS and these have been listed in the decision tables. The corresponding alerts are also presented within the very decision table of a major action for the caregiver to act upon.

Further details of this work are published in the PDF submission of the assignment.
